welcome to the presentation of datalit
catalog a free and open source command
line tool with a python api that lets
you create user-friendly browser-based
data catalogs from structured metadata
the importance and benefits of making
research data finable accessible
interoperable and reusable are clear but
of equal importance
are our legal and ethical obligations to
protect the personal data privacy of
research participants
so we are struck with this apparent
contradiction how can we share our data
openly it keep it secure and protected
should we err on the side of fairness or
of data privacy or do we even have to
choose
ideally no
and in practice also no because we have
a powerful opportunity in the form of
linked structured and machine-readable
metadata
metadata provides not only high-level
information about our research data such
as study and data acquisition parameters
but also the descriptive aspects of each
file in the data set such as file paths
sizes and formats
with this metadata we can create an
abstract representation of the full data
set that is separate from the actual
data content
this means that the content can be
stored securely while we openly share
the metadata to make our work more fair
as an added benefit structured and
machine readable metadata that conforms
to industry standards improves the
interoperability and allows the use of
automated pipelines and tools
these ideals are achievable in practice
with a tool set that includes the
distributed data management system data
ad and its extensions for metadata
handling and catalog generation
data that can be used for decentralized
management of data as lightweight
portable and extensible representations
dataled metal ad can extract structured
high and low level metadata and
associate it with these sets or with
individual files and at the end of the
workflow data catalog can turn the
structured metadata into user-friendly
data browser
so how does this catalog generation
process work
well metadata extracted from various
sources even custom sources can be
aggregated and added to a catalog
incoming metadata will first be
validated against a catalog specific
schema before the catalog is generated
or individual entries are added
once the process is finished the output
is a set of structured metadata files as
well as a view js based browser
interface that understands how to render
this metadata
what is left for the user is to host
this content on their platform of choice
and serve it for the world to see
data catalog brings the powerful
functionality of decentralized metadata
handling and data publishing into the
hands of users preventing dependence on
centralized infrastructure and keeping
private data secure while adhering to
fair principles please explore the demo
catalog walk through the interactive
tutorial or visit the code base to start
using or contributing to data lab
catalog thank you